---
draft: true
title: How I Came to (Somewhat) Enjoy Interviews
description:
  A personal reflection on how I shifted my mindset towards interviews, from
  feeling uncomfortable to finding enjoyment in the process. This article
  explores insights on embracing imperfections, the power of silence, and
  turning challenging questions into discussions.
publishedDate: 2025-04-24
keywords:
  - interview
  - mindset
---

# {frontmatter.title}

**I'll be honest, I often fumble through interviews.** I get stuck on questions,
struggle to express myself clearly, and say weird stuff I normally wouldn't say
— sometimes I walk away thinking, “What even was that?” I'm just not myself.

**What makes it interesting is that I usually enjoy conversations.** When I'm
relaxed and just talking to someone, thoughts come to me naturally, I can
explain things clearly, and I love abstract, philosophical questions. But in
interviews, I just shrink. And preparation doesn’t really seem to help — it
feels like it all goes out the window once I’m in the interview. So I started
wondering: why does it feel so uncomfortable? And how can I rise above it?

## Interviews Often Feel Unnatural To Me

**Interviews often don’t feel like real conversations to me.** In a natural
exchange, both sides are curious and working toward a shared understanding.
There's room for tangents, pauses, even circling back. You don't worry much
about being misunderstood or forgetting something, because shared interest
drives the effort to connect.

Interviews feel different. Sometimes, they seem to lack that shared interest,
and the flow becomes a series of checkpoints — each expecting a clear, concise,
confident answer. It often feels more like performing than connecting.

I've never been on the interviewer side myself, but I imagine their goal is to
find someone who fits the team — experience, mindset, confidence, values. The
interviewee, meanwhile, is focused on making a good impression, decoding
questions, and proving they belong. Both sides are engaged, but aiming at
different things — and that misalignment changes the whole dynamic.

I don't mean to generalize — just trying to make sense of what throws me off.

**I realized that interviews made me uncomfortable because they're fundamentally
different from the kind of conversations I enjoy — and I hadn't been approaching
them with that difference in mind.**

**Recognizing this difference didn't change interviews, but it helped me
approach them differently.** I stopped trying to deliver a perfect performance,
and started treating them in a way I actually enjoy — turning interviews into
something closer to a real conversation.

Over time, certain ideas began to settle.

## Let go of poor expressions

There are often times when I wish I could take back something I just said. Maybe
I didn't express myself clearly, or I rushed and said something that popped into
my head even though I didn't really mean it. This can happen in any
conversation. Normally, I'd just say it came out wrong and see where it takes
us. Sometimes we dig deeper and figure out what we actually think. Other times,
we leave it alone and let the thoughts settle, allowing them to form into
something clearer and easier to express.

But in interviews, time is limited — and we often only get a short window to
express ourselves. In that brief span, **it's usually more effective to keep
moving forward**, rather than trying to fix or perfect what's already been said.

I also realized that poor expressions happen more easily in interviews — it's in
the nature of brief yet complex conversations. Interviews compress
self-expression into a tight, high-stakes format, where words sometimes come out
before they fully form. **It's important to remember that a single imperfect
answer is just an attempt at expressing yourself — it doesn't represent your
true image.** Recognizing this made it easier to let go of mistakes, and in
turn, made interviews feel lighter and less intimidating.

Now, I don't overthink how I'm coming across. If something doesn't land the way
I intended, I just accept it and keep the conversation going.

## Embrace silence, ease the flow

**Silence can actually be pretty comfortable. It gives space for thoughts and
interests, making the conversation lighter and allowing room to rest.**

Normally, I don't feel awkward or pressured to fill the gaps in regular
conversations. But in certain situations, like some moments during interviews, I
lose this good habit and feel an urge to say more. It's like a sense of
proactivity I think I _should_ have, but it's unnecessary and I'm just overdoing
it.

I think it's also worth noting, that silence benefits everyone. When I rush to
fill the silence unnecessarily, I'm not just tiring myself out, but also wearing
down the other listeners' attention and patience.

So that's one of the reasons interviews used to feel heavy and exhausting for
me. Ever since I noticed it and started letting conversations breathe again,
interviews feel much better.

## Some questions should be discussions

I like questions, they are a key part of conversations — they reveal how people
think about certain topics. However, some questions can be challenging. They may
be broad, vague, or abstract, and may be understood or seen differently by each
individual. They can be difficult to answer on the spot because they often
require time to define terms, narrow the scope, pick an angle, process the
context, and organize a meaningful response.

Those kinds of questions often have traits that really derail my thinking.

1. The premise may not hold true for everyone.
2. The question may be asked from a mindset that differs from the one of the
   person being asked.
3. Some of the concepts behind these questions only need to get concretized when
   you're sharing them.

For example, here's a question that would immediately freeze my brain:

> Describe a situation where you had a significant disagreement with a colleague
> during a project. How did you handle it?

And this would be my thought process:

> Significant? That's serious, I don't think I've ever felt that strongly about
> anything. Disagreement? I usually don't disagree right away, and I think I've
> always reached an understanding in arguments.
>
> How did I handle it? I guess this question is asking how I exchange opinions
> and reach a consensus with others. Let me simulate a conversation in my
> mind...

Yes, I think a lot. But that's exactly why these kinds of questions are tricky.
The premise “had a significant disagreement” doesn't necessarily hold true for
everyone, possibly because of a different mindset from the one in the question.
Moreover, this isn't really something that you would concretized if it weren't
for a discussion. **While something valuable and insightful could emerge, it's
hard for that to happen on the spot.**

There are plenty of guides, tips, and sample answers online that show you how to
respond to questions like this. And of course, if you're willing to invest the
time and energy to prepare and practice extensively, that's absolutely a valid
approach. But for me personally, that method feels draining — and it's not
something I enjoy.

Now, I treat these questions as the starting point for a discussion, and I
genuinely believe that's what they're better suited for. When I'm asked a
question like that, I want to begin a thought process and bring others into it.
I want to share my actual thinking and values around the topic, rather than
forcing myself to craft a polished story on the spot. That way, it becomes a
more natural and authentic exchange — not just a performance.

And it has really made me much more relaxed. I mean, these questions were never
easy to prepare for, and there are endless possibilities for them. I used to
worry about what might stump me in every interview. Not anymore! Now, I can
actually look forward to interesting questions and the insights they bring!

## Just convey the tip of the iceberg

When discussing abstract or broad topics, I often find myself with many ideas
that I consider valuable and interesting. I really want to share them and am
curious about the other person’s perspective. There’s a strong impulse to
express everything at once, to communicate all of my thoughts in a single
conversation.

However, this comes with a challenge.

Sometimes, the ideas or concepts are highly internalized, intuitive and
abstract, like values or ethics. Usually, they need to be built up layer by
layer, using metaphors or approaching them from different angles, to bring
across the feeling I want to share. Even when a direct explanation is possible,
it still takes time to settle my thoughts and find a clear way to express them —
it’s not something I can do instantly.

Some other times, I haven’t fully thought through every detail. When I’m
imagining things in my own mind, everything feels smooth because my brain can
intuitively fill in the missing parts. But when I try to describe these thoughts
to someone else, I have to consciously manage all the details, and that suddenly
makes it much harder.

If I embrace the impulse to express everything at once, I often end up switching
between different angles and adding more and more details. This leads to
confusion, jumping from one point to another, or over-explaining. Even though I
have a clear understanding internally, translating it into language often causes
me to stumble.

If the conversation is casual and relaxed, it can be an enjoyable process to
work together and form a better understanding of the topic. But in more
constrained situations, such as a job interview or time-limited conversations,
this confusion becomes more evident, and the outcome is less effective.

So, I started to share only the tip of the iceberg.

- **Provide a rough direction or general idea** so that the other person can get
  the gist of it.
- **Don’t obsess over getting everything perfectly right.** It’s okay if the
  explanation is slightly off or even a bit wrong, as long as it conveys 80% to
  90% of the idea. If the other person is interested, we can gradually fill in
  the gaps and refine the explanation as we go along.

It’s like the process of learning. Learning often starts with misunderstandings
or incomplete knowledge, but as long as you keep accumulating and refining that
knowledge, your understanding will eventually become more accurate, complete,
and layered.

Seeing it from this angle also helped me with two other things: letting go of
poor expressions and feeling okay to pause in between. Once I stopped trying to
make myself fully understood, the conversation felt lighter, clearer, and I
stopped worrying about expressing things poorly. **I realized it’s not realistic
to expect others to fully understand right away anyway.**

## Have it your way, comfortable, enjoyable and worthwhile
